[MUSIC PLAYING]
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."
Have you ever been driving
on a regular route home
and then suddenly you realize
you don't remember the last 20
minutes of your drive at all?
This happened to
me the other day
when I got home from
a friend's house.
I thought, whoa, wait a
minute, how am I already home?
And oh my gosh,
how did I get here?
It made me think, how often does
our subconscious take the wheel
during our daily routines?
Are we conditioned
to just give over
control and go through
our day unconsciously
like sleepwalkers?
Think of it this way.
Let's say the human
brain is an iceberg.
While we're consciously
aware, both within ourselves
and in our environment, it's
just the tip of the iceberg.
Sometimes, if we're
not paying attention,
the amount we're aware of
is more like one snowflake
on the tip of the iceberg.
And the rest of what's
happening in our brain
is processed subconsciously
beneath the surface
of our awareness.
This gives you a sense of how
little we're actually aware of
and how much subconscious
processes tie up
our brain capacity.
Our brain actually registers
100% of what we're exposed to.
But psychologists
often say, we're
only consciously aware of
10%, just a tiny sliver
of the information coming in.
Meanwhile, there's quite a
bit of subconscious activity
going on behind the
scenes, and that activity
influences our thoughts and
actions, even though we're not
aware of it.
Can we agree that
by not being aware,
we're no longer in
the driver's seat?
Our subconscious thoughts,
emotions, and programs
are driving our course
of action in life,
and we're not even aware
that it's happening.
If we're not aware, then we're
no longer in the driver's seat.
The bottom line
here is if we want
to have more of a hand
on our own journey
and put our hands on
the steering wheel,
we need to evolve
our conscious mind.
Part of this work starts with
using our senses intentionally.
The secret to this is that by
actively engaging our senses,
we carry the torch
of consciousness
deeper into the brain.
And this is where it
gets really exciting.
By actively engaging
our senses, we
can strengthen our
connections and build
bridges of consciousness
throughout the brain and body
system.
In our journey to accessing
our full potential,
we must become more
consciously aware of the deeper
processes of our brain.
Here, we come to the threshold
between the higher functioning
regions of the cortex
and the midbrain.
This area is known
as the limbic system.
It's a gateway between
the oldest parts
of our brain and the cortex.
This area is the key to managing
our emotions, motivation,
fear responses,
social interactions,
and long-term memories.
We're often disconnected from
the subconscious influence
of this area.
In order to bridge
into the limbic system,
we must cross this threshold by
going deeper within ourselves.
This brings us to
a transition point
between our outer experience
and our inner self.
As we make this shift from an
outward focus to an inward one,
we have to bring our
attention within.
And we must relax.
We must let go of tension in
the body, tuning into one's self
and letting go of the
stresses of the outside world.
These are skills
that we can master.
It is possible to learn to
let go of stress at will.
However, if we have a
disconnect or a faulty wiring
within the limbic
system, it can become
extremely difficult to relax.
And when we're having
difficulty relaxing,
it can lead to anxiety,
hypertension, or even ADHD.
The good news is as we bring
our conscious awareness
into the limbic system,
we have the ability
to release old,
suppressed emotions.
And by working
through this process,
we're able to gain
greater mastery
over our emotional state.
Another benefit is
that we also become
more aware of the
motivations that drive us.
This opens the door for us to
become more intentional in how
we choose to stimulate the
reward center within our brain.
So the question here is,
how do we access the system?
Everything begins by relaxing.
This helps us shift into
an alpha brainwave state.
The alpha state
is also a gateway
between waking and sleeping.
As we relax, we move from more
awake, active brainwave levels
of the beta state
into an alpha state.
And that alpha state
is the frequency bridge
between our conscious mind
and our subconscious mind.
The deeper we go,
the more we relax.
We ultimately move through alpha
into the more meditative theta
state of 3 to 8 hertz.
We have wonderful options to
help us to relax and access
an alpha state.
Some you may have used before
are light meditation, yoga,
tai chi, even guided
visualizations.
And when we use these tools,
our brainwaves actually
slow down to the 8
to 12 hertz range
that defines the alpha state.
And at this slowed-down
rate, we start to gain access
to more spiritual energy.
However, as adults, we tend to
operate our day-to-day lives
while in the beta state,
which is about 13 to 35 hertz.
That beta state
happens when we're
focusing on the outer
world, which is distracting.
This makes it more difficult
to connect to the subtle realms
and the spiritual frequencies.
Children, on the
other hand, primarily
operate in an alpha a state.
And as a result, they're highly
connected to a spiritual state
of being.
They're constantly accessing
this imaginative, dreamlike
state.
And this is why they experience
so many inner visions.
Adults often label these
as fantasy or imagination.
But to a child, these inner
visions are very real.
When adults relax, we
are able to open up
to more of our spiritual
connection too,
much like children do.
And we may start to
perceive and receive
more spiritual energies.
This allows us to tap
into the imagery, symbols,
and sacred geometry patterns
that lie within the fabric
of the higher dimensions.
These symbols and imageries
are the building blocks
of creation, and they're
based on sacred geometries
and archetypes.
Another state in which we often
access these building blocks
of creation is during sleep.
Our dreams communicate to
us through these archetypes
and symbols.
And if our third
eye is open enough
and we know how to shift
our brainwaves at will,
we may even perceive these
energies while fully awake.
For us to access these
transcendent states,
we must bring our
awareness to what we can
call the introspection bridge.
This is where we begin
to tune into ourselves
and bring our conscious
awareness into the functions
of the limbic system.
The key to this is to
shift our attention away
from the outside world
and into our body.
We can do this by
noticing what sensations
we feel within our body.
This helps us to pick up
on subtle feelings, which
is a way for us to tune
into our emotional state.
Over time and with
practice, we become
used to shifting easily into
the alpha brainwave state,
even with our eyes open.
But starting out, we begin by
closing our eyes and relaxing.
Start by releasing
tension and letting
go of physical attachments.
Allow the mind to
drift into whatever
imagery presents itself.
Tai chi and moving
meditation really
help make a shift
into this alpha state.
We also focus on the breath to
bring our mind and attention
inwards.
In tai chi or qi
gong, we flow energy
while slowly moving the
body, pulling in energy
from the earth and
the universe and then
flowing it back out
through the aura.
Ultimately, this kind
of deep introspection
guides us to ask the
big questions in life.
Who am I?
Why am I here?
What is my purpose?
And in order to tune in and be
in touch with our true selves,
we have to ask these questions.
Why do I feel what I feel?
And what is it that I'm supposed
to learn from this situation?
If we focus on small details
or on external drama,
the lessons won't come.
But if we can ask
these deeper questions,
if we can ask, what is
it revealing about me,
we can move through and
elevate any experience
to a higher perspective.
No matter what challenges
we face in life,
asking these questions
opens the possibility
to change and transformation.
By asking the questions and
tuning in for the answers,
we can begin to discern
the inner, subtle realms
of consciousness.
These questions help connect
us to our inner wisdom
and knowledge.
In order to heal, we
must do the work and face
what's going on inside of us.
Healing really is the key.
And the only way to do
that is to peel back
the layers like an onion and to
get to the core of the issue.
Distracting oneself
won't change anything.
It just means that our emotions
will remain there buried.
And if we don't deal
with them, then they
will eventually take their
toll on our well-being.
But then the question is,
is it possible to deal
with emotions we may not
be consciously aware of?
The answer is yes.
Our senses are tools
that we can use
to stimulate the limbic
system and facilitate healing.
One good way to stimulate
the limbic in and particular
is with a aroma therapy.
Aroma therapy helps us to relax.
And because of
our sense of smell
is linked to our
emotions and memories,
we can use it to help
release emotional wounds
and old memories, even the
ones we didn't know we had.
The process is quite simple.
Using an essential
oil like lavender,
we breathe it in and focus
on what we want to bring in.
For example, I breathe in
forgiveness and healing.
And as we breathe out,
we release whatever
it is we choose to release.
For example I release my
anger, or I release my sadness.
And it's important to
affirm this out loud
and say what we're
letting go of.
Ancient spiritual traditions
have always used oils
to expand consciousness.
In Kabbalah, for example, every
sephiroth on the tree of life
has a unique correspondence
of herbs and essential oils.
Each part of the
tree also corresponds
to a different healing
benefit, an aspect of ourself.
Working with the
tree of life, allows
us to find an appropriate
oil to support us
in healing a specific aspect
of our mind, our body,
and our life.
The tree of life
is a blueprint that
can help us identify where
that emotional wound or issue
exists.
Once we identify what part of
the tree of life it relates to,
we can then choose
a corresponding oil
to help us deal with the
emotions or issues in our life.
For example, let's say we're
struggling with self-worth.
Kabbalah reveals
that this is related
to an imbalance in Kether, the
very top of the tree of life
located above our head.
One of the aromas
assigned to Kether
is frankincense, a very high,
vibrational, and sacred oil.
And what we can do then is use
this high quality frankincense
oil to anoint our crown
and then rub the remaining
amount on our wrists, our
palms, and then breathe it
in deep several times.
With each in breath,
affirm something
like, I breathe in my
divinity and my worthiness.
With each out breath say, I
release all guilt and shame.
Make this a daily practice.
But what about other senses?
What other senses
stimulate emotion for us?
Have you ever been moved
by a piece of music?
Most of us have.
Since the auditory
nerve is strongly
connected to the
limbic system, it
allows certain sounds to deeply
stimulate our emotional center
within the brain.
Music can also create
a cathartic experience.
Teenagers often turn
to music to help cope
with their intense emotions.
They use music to
express themselves
and to release whatever
emotional buildup they have,
whether it's sadness,
anger, or joy.
Now that we understand
the power of music,
the important
question is, how do we
find music that will actually
help us rewire and heal
the limbic system?
Well, first of all,
when looking for music
that will help us to
shift into an alpha state,
there are two things
to keep in mind.
One is that the music
is rhythmic and calming.
The other is to use
music with no lyrics.
If the music has
lyrics, we end up
processing those lyrics with the
language centers of the cortex.
And we don't want to
do that if our goal is
to consciously access
the deeper brain centers.
We actually want the music
to fade into the background
so that it becomes
almost like wallpaper.
We're not focusing on it.
We might not even
notice it, yet the music
adds to the overall environment.
When we look at this as it
relates to brain development,
we see that natural
sounds and music
are processed within the
deeper part of the brain.
Throughout our
evolution, humans were
exposed to the sounds
of nature far earlier
than words or language.
So music without lyrics
is the most effective way
for stimulating the
limbic system in addition
to aroma therapy.
And it moves us out of the
language centers of the cortex
and into deeper
regions of the brain.
One system of music
thought to bring us
into an emotionally rich state
so that we can access subtle,
spiritual energies is known
as solfeggio frequencies.
They first emerged within
these religious and spiritual
ceremonies to inspire states
of spiritual transcendence.
Solfeggio frequencies are
based on a numerology system
where each number can be
reduced down to a 3, 6, or 9.
Nikola Tesla once
said, if you only
knew the significance
of the 3, 6, and 9,
then you would have the
keys to the universe.
Numbers are truly the building
blocks of the universe.
And they hold the
keys to harnessing
the energies of the cosmos.
Music and chants tuned
to solfeggio frequencies
stimulate the limbic system,
which helps release emotions
and accelerate healing.
This kind of music can
bring us into a state
of spiritual transcendence.
And as we turn inward, we may
encounter an emotional charge
buried within our subconscious.
And when this emotion
rises to the surface,
we're able to come into greater
awareness, which in turn,
allows us to heal, to let go.
And from there, we're able
to create a new pattern.
And once we release,
it's important to have
a strategy in
place for how we're
going to replace the old
pattern because as we
let go of the old, we
must bring in the new.
Like tuning the radio dial,
each solfeggio frequency
has a specific vibration.
According to Leonard
Horowitz, they each
correspond to a
different benefit.
396 hertz is associated with
liberating guilt and fear.
417 hertz assists with undoing
situations and facilitating
change, thus breaking up
crystallized, emotional
patterns.
528 hertz has been used
by genetic biochemists
to structure water and
relax the DNA coil.
It's said to be associated with
transformation and miracles,
while 639 hertz brings greater
whole brain connectedness.
It supports us with
connecting in relationships
and having overall
experience of unity.
741 hertz is related
to awakening intuition
and nonlinear knowing.
852 hertz is returning to
what we call spiritual order
and training us
into an experience
of unconditional love.
Now keep in mind,
these frequencies
aren't meant to be used
as a scale altogether.
Instead, each number becomes the
base of its own tuning scale.
And a powerful
combination is to start
with a solfeggio frequency
as the base number
and then to use
Pythagorean tuning scale
to build off of it.
Each step up the
scale would then
be a perfect 5th ratio in line
with the Fibonacci sequence.
Let me tell you a little
mystery school secret.
The solfeggio frequencies
use numerology
to attune to the pure Hermetic
and Ensofic rays of energy,
the primary rays of creation.
So beyond helping
us rewire our brain,
we're working with
these esoteric energies
that connect us into these
powerful rays of creation.
Remember, it's all
about vibration.
All energy in the universe has
certain frequency of vibration.
Each of us have a
range of frequencies
that we may vibrate at
in in any given moment.
And many factors within
our day-to-day life
influence our energy
and our vibration.
Everything we choose
to eat or drink,
our thoughts, whether negative
or positive, our emotions--
all of these have
influence on our energy.
Humans are actually
naturally supposed
to operate at the 528 hertz.
This is supposed to be
our homeostasis point.
When we can bring our
whole being into coherence
with this single
frequency, that is
when we have arrived at an
enlightenment type of state.
We are in tune with the
universal galactic vibration.
This is the original
vibration of the Hermetic ray,
the first ray.
Any deviation from this pure
ray results in misalignment
with our galactic oneness.
In addition to raising
our baseline frequencies
to a higher level, what
if we could actually
raise our baseline
for experiencing
more pleasure in life?
Let's explore this
possibility by looking
at another core structure
of the limbic system, which
is the hippocampus area.
When this area is stimulated,
biochemicals like dopamine
are released, and we
feel good, really good.
It's our reward center
and our pleasure center
within the brain.
Now naturally, people crave
a rush of this dopamine.
And they seek it out
by going to parties
or going dancing
or playing games.
But often, these moments of
pleasure are short lived,
and so we end up going
back for more and more.
And this drive to keep
the dopamine flowing
can lead to unhealthy
habits and addictions.
Now both the hippocampus
and the basal ganglia
are strongly connected to our
sense of happiness, motivation,
and emotional well-being.
These areas regulate our
motivational behavior
and help us take action
on the goals we set.
We activate these areas
in those moments when
we feel like we've
just solved a puzzle
or in moments of joy or
laughter, like the aha moment
or a punchline of a joke.
These give us this
sense of feeling
good and of satisfaction.
And here's the key.
The more work we do
to get to that moment,
the more enriching it is.
I see this when we dive into the
esoteric studies of hermetics.
And students have this
experience all the time.
It's like the lights come on,
and there's this aha moment.
But it's earned because the
student put the puzzle together
within themselves.
It's not something
that is taught.
It's creating an
opportunity for the puzzle
to come together so that you
can have your own revelation
and insight into yourself.
It gives us a new
perspective of who we are
and what this life is about.
It gives us insight into
our sense of purpose
and what we should be
doing with our lives.
As we move out of inertia and
toward greater empowerment
and progression, it's
profoundly powerful.
In today's world, all
kinds of industries
have found ways to capitalize
upon the pleasure center,
and they steer our
choices and daily habits.
We're encouraged
towards consumerism,
and so we waste our time
chasing these moments
of immediate and
fleeting pleasure
without a sense of fulfillment.
But in ancient
spiritual practices,
there's a tradition of
accessing the pleasure state yet
in a more holistic
and conscious way
to stimulate our whole being.
It's a path of progression
towards embodying our divinity.
And there's real joy in that.
We can choose how we use
this motivational center
to keep us moving
forward towards greater
fulfillment and growth.
Now the path towards
balancing the limbic system
can be challenging.
But the work we do here
brings an even greater reward.
When we approach this
introspection bridge,
the very first challenge
is to face ourselves.
When we tune in, we
have the opportunity
to sit with ourselves.
And this can be uncomfortable
because emotions buried
under the surface may rise up.
It may be an emotional
experience, but it's good.
It can be a
cathartic and healing
release of old, buried emotions,
and it can move them out
of our system.
If a suppressed emotion has
been there for long times,
we've probably pushed it away
to avoid dealing with it.
And when our emotions
are suppressed,
they go into a passive state.
But during moments of
high stress, they surface.
And they make the situation
more difficult and confusing
to deal with.
It really doesn't help
to suppress emotions.
They will get the better
of us at some point.
So our goal as we step across
the introspection bridge
is to go in and heal.
In order to heal and
release this emotion,
we bring it from a passive
state to an active one.
And we do that by allowing
ourselves to feel it.
When we step up to face
these buried emotions,
it gives us the opportunity
to decide when and how we're
going to deal with them.
Otherwise, the emotion may
rise up at the wrong time
and catch us off guard.
So instead, we want to
tune in and allow ourselves
to feel them on
our time and then
find the proper
outlets to release them
in a safe and constructive way.
But first, we need
to give ourselves
permission to go there
and be in that emotion.
And there are many
tools that can
help us process these
emotions in a healthy way.
Journaling is really helpful
for acknowledging and releasing
those emotions.
Using essential oils is helpful.
And when we combine that with
the affirmation and trauma
release, it's even better.
Listening to the right music or
going into a somatic therapist
to help us also with
releasing this trauma
can be extremely valuable.
If we don't process and
release these emotions,
they get stuck in the body.
They get stored in our
organs, and this can
lead to chronic health issues.
We may try to treat
the physical body,
but there's an emotional source.
And when the unresolved
emotion manifests physically,
it causes problems for us.
Somatic methods are
a great way to help
us find those areas in the body
where the emotional blockages
are stored.
And then using a
combination of breath
and active imagination
plus some subtle movements,
we tune in to what's there.
Using sound and tones, we can
move that energy up and out
of the body.
Let's now pull this all together
into a practical approach
to balance these areas
within the limbic system.
We've discussed the
solfeggio frequencies
to stimulate the hippocampus and
activate the emotional center
of the brain.
A great album to start with
is JS Epperson's Solfeggio
Frequency or The Creative
Alchemy Instrumental Mix.
I also recommend an artist by
the name of Source Vibrations
who works with solfeggio
frequencies quite effectively.
While playing solfeggio
frequencies in the background,
we can take this a step further.
We can then bring in the
essential oils and breathing
techniques to activate and
release emotions from the body.
Different oils will work
with different aspects
of our emotions.
Frankincense is a very
high vibrational oil.
It's a sacred oil.
And research shows
it lifts the spirit
and is actually a
natural antidepressant.
We can work with the oil
by placing a drop of it
on one palm and then
swirling it around clockwise
to activate it, then
breathe it in deeply,
breathing in through the nose
and out through the mouth.
Breathe in and affirm
a positive quality,
whatever you'd like to
bring in, whether it's
peace or healing or joy.
And then breathe out and name
whatever negative emotion needs
to be released.
It can be something like this.
I breathe in joy, and
I release my anger.
Or I release my
pain or my sadness,
whatever it is for you.
And this can be repeated until
you start to feel a shift.
Oils like lavender, rosemary,
chamomile, or patchouli
are also good and have more of
an emotional quality to them.
A higher therapeutic
grade essential oil
will also penetrate
the blood-brain barrier
when breathed in deeply.
Another way to
work with the oils
is to anoint the body to assist
with this release process.
Anoint wherever that emotion is
held within your body, wherever
it feels stuck.
It's always good to
anoint also at the heart
or the solar plexus, anoint the
risks, the sides of the neck,
also behind the ears.
It's all good.
The vagus nerve runs along
the neck down into the heart
and even to the gut.
And by anointing behind the
ears or the sides of the neck,
we're activating the nerves that
travel to many of the organs
within our body.
This process is also cathartic.
It can be intense at times,
but it's very effective.
Once the emotion
is released, we can
return to a state
of grace and relief
from both the physical
and the emotional pain.
We can return to a state of
homeostasis with more joy
and ease.
We can experience greater
coherence within ourselves.
Releasing these old and
stuck emotions from the body
takes a weight off of
our backs, and the result
is an expansiveness,
a broadening
of our emotional spectrum.
We'll have a greater
bandwidth and more compassion
for others and for ourselves.
There's one final
key to share here.
Embrace laughter in
this healing process.
There is nothing
like a good laugh
to trigger our limbic
system with positive input.
And laughter also synchronizes
many parts of our brain.
It's great medicine, and
it has a contagious effect.
Laughing bonds us
together and leaves us
with a sense of euphoria.
Those who reach higher
states of consciousness
often describe
reaching a point where
they are more frequently happy.
And they are able to
laugh at themselves
and find joy and pleasure
in each step of the journey.
The Dalai Lama is a
great example of this.
He can be silly, and
he loves to laugh.
He brings joy and humor
into everything he does.
Crossing this
introspection bridge
and activating the full
potential of the limbic system
is our pathway to reach this
expanded emotional spectrum.
It shifts our vibration
and our baseline
towards feeling more
content and joyful in life.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
Thank you for
exploring the mysteries
of our human potential with
me in this episode of "Mystery
Teachings."
[MUSIC PLAYING]